[Music]
everybody welcome to conversations with
Tom I am here with legendary investor
Ray Dalio ray thank you so much for
joining me today
pleasure so I really wish that we were
connecting under better circumstances
I have made no secret about the fact
that I learned more about business from
principles I think than virtually any
other business book that's completely
influenced the way that we build our
culture now with what's going on with
the economic crisis I find myself once
again turning to what you're putting out
and all the stuff that you're doing on
LinkedIn is is really very insightful
taking a historical perspective lovely
hear a little bit about just sort of the
thinking why are you going back through
all the historical stuff right now
well as you know the same things happen
over and over again through time for
basically the same reasons a lot of
these things happen once in a lifetime
you know and if you don't go back and
see how they worked over time then
you're in trouble so there's a pattern I
could describe the pattern but there's a
pattern that happens over and over again
and we're in a particular spot in the
pattern and then to understand it not
just because it happened before but to
understand mechanistically how it
happens and then one has a sense of how
to deal with it so speaking of the
mechanisms what's influencing this more
when you started looking back into
history are you looking for this sort of
moment in the death cycle or are you
looking for pandemics a collision of the
two what do you think influences is more
well pandemics come along occasionally
but anything that's important let me say
the three most important circumstances
that existed before we had the downturn
which was caused by a pandemic but any
downturn would have produced the same
results the three most important things
that are happening in the world now are
that we're at the end late in a long
term debt cycle in which
central banks cannot control monetary
policy the same way they can't lower
interest rates they have they can't get
money to a lot of people who need the
money
in the traditional way so just like in
1929 to 1932 there was a debt crisis
that came as a result of an excessive
amount of debt in the boom years and
then when you have that in 1932 we hit
zero interest rates and when they had
when they hit zero interest rates in 32
like in 2008 central bank prints money
and buys financial assets let's talk
about financial assets this is one thing
that even I found myself a little bit
confused by what what is a financial
asset
well mostly bonds okay central bank is
allowed to buy bonds to mostly
government bonds so if you were gonna
describe what a bond is like what's the
easiest way to think about a bond
um when someone borrows for a number of
years and has to pay back that makes a
promise to deliver currency that's a
bond and so one man's debts or in other
man's assets which we call a bond and
that is a promise to deliver currency
and so what happens in these cycles is
that normally central banks can
stimulate the economy by lowering
interest rates but when you hit zero
interest rates that doesn't work so the
last time it hits zero interest rates
was 1932 and what they did in 1932 was
the same thing they did in 2008 and that
is that the central bank's prints a lot
of money and buys government bonds and
so we're doing that now and just to be
clear the reason that they're doing that
is so somebody has bought a government
bond the government is basically saying
hey
dear person lend me the money I'm gonna
build something roads whatever but I'm
gonna pay you back in a year two years
ten years whatever plus interest I would
assume that makes it worthwhile and the
reason that the government is going in
and buying those is to get back
liquidity to the people that have loaned
them that money yes because think of it
this way the central government and also
companies and individuals don't have the
capacity to create money so the central
government has the right to determine
they could tax people they can get money
from people and they can spend money on
whatever they want to spend money on but
they don't have the right to print money
and create money and credit like the
central bank does central bankers that
are reserved
similarly the Federal Reserve does not
have the right to spend money and
determine how it's spent that's for
Congress all right so so before because
this can get so confusing and I'll play
the role of the layman here and just
make sure that we walk through things so
the Federal Reserve I think most people
think is a Department of the government
but they're not are they a private bank
no they're they're a part of the
government that the government that the
system has put into place so to get the
creation of money out of the political
system okay so it's sort of outside of
the political sphere of the government
it is within Congress but it has a set
of rules like the Supreme Court has a
set of rules that means that the
president can't control it the Congress
can't control it
that it's operating in a sense a
separate way and so the important thing
to know about this crisis and that had
happened in the 1930s is that in order
to get the checks that we're needing you
know a lot of people a lot of companies
need checks now where will thou those
checks come from so they'll be checks
from the government the type of support
we're going to receive
is two types of support where's this all
this money come from so that the
government when they say I'm gonna pay
more for unemployment insurance or I'm
going to give you a loan for a small
business or so on they wear their they
get the money from well they either tax
it but if they tax it that's bad so the
government they can borrow it that's
what a deficit is the government runs a
deficit and then the question is who's
going to borrow it when everybody's
financially strapped and the Federal
Reserve says they have the power to
print money and they will say I will
borrow it and I will lend you the money
so the Federal Reserve is lending the
money and it is also lending others the
money all right
yes when when they print money are they
literally sending a Brinks truck with
bags full of cash and distributing it
through local banks no money is digital
okay so they're really just making
ledger adjustments in a digital file
somewhere right the important thing to
know is that all that we think about
money is not limited in any way like
there's a certain amount of money out
there it's all make-believe it's all
digital so they could change the digits
and then they can create money now
that's an important consideration
because if they can create money so
easily how do we know it's going to be a
value when they're creating a lot of it
that's one of the considerations that
are being faced today but the main thing
to know about this yeah stepping back
for the big picture is that every
individual every company and every
government has certain amount of money
that comes in in the form of income a
certain amount of expenses that and then
a certain amount of savings so you do
individually and every all your
listeners do and it works the same way
for everyone so that if there
income falls and then gret less to be
less than their expenditures they're in
trouble unless they have a good savings
and then they go to the savings so all
around the world there are lots of
entities that are in trouble in that way
so the government the two parts of the
government the US government two parts
want to give checks to people now it's
difficult to decide who gets it who
doesn't get it but if they don't give
checks to people or to companies those
will go bankrupt because they may not
have enough savings so you you saw
j.crew went bankrupt just went bankrupt
and you'll see others go bankrupt
because they don't have enough and so
when they go bankrupt
and that's a whole other process so in
order to prevent that they have to give
money and so they print money we call it
print there's not even paper much it's
digitally create money and then that
comes in the form of loans okay so
basically they are digitally creating
money which they're allocating to the
government and then the government is
deciding how to disperse those funds
yeah the Federal Reserve will buy
government bonds so it's a transaction
of buying it and that the and they will
also buy private thoughts okay they
might pick a company and many companies
and they'll say I will buy your bonds
which is the equivalent I will lend to
you and that's what happens okay and
that's happened through history so what
we're going through is the same process
has happened in the 1930 to 1945 period
so as I was saying there are three
important things that is one the second
is large wealth gap third is that we
have a rising power in the form of China
emerging to compete or challenge
United States leadership so when you
have these three things together it's
it's a challenging mix and it's happened
repeatedly less effective monetary and
credit system makes it they have to
print a lot of money can threaten the
value of money second when you have a
large wealth gap and you have an
economic downturn people are more
inclined to have conflict so how that's
dealt with we're going to reconsider how
we're going to that wealth will be
divided and that'll change taxes and
relationships and then the third is
we're no longer in a world order where
the United States is the only dominant
power these three things existed and the
most important things existed and then
we had the downturn terms in terms of
the virus so you could think of the
virus like being a tsunami that came and
if it went and if we had not no more of
it it still would have left a lot of
economic damage so you in all different
ways so the the economic damage has to
be understood and dealt with yeah so the
understood and dealt with is exactly why
I wanted to talk to you so I think that
people that are familiar with finance
and financial institutions and how the
economy works and all that they'll find
their way through this but for the
average person who doesn't understand a
lot of this like when you look at this
historical perspective I find a certain
level of comfort in that because of the
notion of another one of the ease right
so we've seen this before maybe we
haven't in our lifetime but historically
people have so what can the average
person take away from that they don't
have bonds they don't think like that
they may not even understand what their
401k is or they may not even have a 401k
so how do they navigate this is it just
head down do your best to weather the
storm or is there actually something
that they can learn from the historical
perspective and move on now to make this
easier for them
yeah it's the it's the same for every
individual same for every company you
say and you if you understand this then
you understand there well there are
three things the first is look at your
income your expenses and your savings
and then do a stress test so that you
get yourself secure if you were to lose
your income or if the income were to
fall beyond a certain level and you play
that out maybe that's means you go get
unemployment insurance burger or
whatever how long can you live in an
acceptable lifestyle and do you have a
savings that is adequate for that okay
so what you do is you calculate if I
lived in a simpler lifestyle and I had
this amount of earnings um how many
months how many months or years could I
live acceptable then you look at your
what what do you put the money in
what do you save it don't you know that
there's a level of financial literacy so
you're saying the basics right and
there's no question like it's your
blocking and tackling right before you
start trying to get fancy but I Rea I
have legitimately started losing sleep
over like how we help the average person
through this I'm not a guy I don't lose
sleep over much but when I stop and
think about most people I think the stat
is the average American if they're hit
with a surprise $500 bill they're not
able to make it they are living
month-to-month you've got 30 plus
million people now out of work it's you
know it trying to figure out like
definitely basics right you've got make
sure that you're spending less and you
make austerity first cut cut cut
get your
expenses down to as low as they can a
hundred percent what what I'm hoping for
is that there's I don't know there's
something that we can see in in this
kind of transition where either you've
got a new rising power and there's
opportunity with that I'm trying to find
that sort of ray of hope for people of
what they can do to be proactive either
to generate more income if they've lost
their income or to be more proactive in
their 401k I think about personal
finance the way I think about health and
right now I worry that people are
outsourcing everything to somebody else
to the government they're they have a
wait-and-see approach and what I'm
desperately trying to figure out for
myself is what level of proactiveness of
learning about their health they can do
to try to weather this storm because
short of just saving and cutting
expenses and maybe that's it maybe there
there isn't any more that they can do
but I guess that's my direct question is
there something I mean you know the
parts right it's it's income expenses
and save base okay now you can go get
the money maybe the gun if money comes
in and you say okay my unemployment
benefits are going to be this or my this
is but um those are the parts then the
issue is how clever are you at dealing
with those well let me ask it another
way then who should they be voting for
like when you talk about a beautiful
deleveraging which one you should
probably define that so you've looked at
this stuff so many times it's really
really quite breathtaking that there are
ways to do this well there are ways to
do this poorly you know we're in an
election year I consider myself like the
most a political human being on the
planet but when I stop and think about
okay well if I'm an average person and
let's say that I'm really doing my best
I'm doing the blocking and tackling
I'm saving what I can save I've cut my
expenses back I'm I'm earning you know
what I can let's hope that they either
have kept their job or we're able to
quickly get another job how should they
be thinking like what are what is the
right way to go through this
deleveraging at a
a political level maybe politics isn't
the right word but like at a higher
level well you know I don't know what
you want it to say I think that each
person should understand there's a
certain level of basic understanding
first take care of yourself and then you
know you hope that you have smart people
who I think will most important thing is
that they're smart in being able to
engineer an economy that will increase
the size of the pie as well as divide
the pie well and then also that this is
done in a non antagonistic way smart
people working together in a bipartisan
way have the capacity of managing this
well so if I was giving political advice
and that's not what I do but if I was
giving political advice the most
important thing I think is who can do
this who's got the intelligence to do
the engineering plus to do it in a
manner that we are not fighting with
each other that what history has shown
us is that when things get difficult
people get stressed and they get they
can get angry and they could all fight
with each other and that produces the
next leg of a terrible economy because
the economy won't work efficiently if
people are fighting with each other the
system doesn't work well so one would
have to say you know who's gonna bring
the country together behind sensible I
would say bipartisan programs because if
you don't have that then you have a form
of revolution and you don't have good
management and that's the greatest risk
I would say politically so looking at
the historical perspective who has done
this well and then what have been
mistakes that have led to literal
revolution when you say who has done it
well what do you mean what countries or
what periods of time has
going through this kind of crisis been
managed well so that we come out the
other side with his little sort of pain
and suffering as possible well an
example of well would be the differences
in the way Roosevelt did it
so again 1929 232 interest rates hit
zero they print money
we had a large wealth gap and then they
sat down and they figured out how do we
keep it orderly and how do we change the
circumstances with whether it's taxes or
how do you realize it so that the system
works well there is a risk also at the
same time because the world is going
through that there's a risk of conflict
so in Germany Hitler came in power in
1933 and he came in power in 1933
because there was a lot of internal
fighting as to try to bring produce
order because that everybody the left
and the right you know the Communists
and the fascists and they're all
fighting about wealth because
everybody's fighting about wealth when
you have a downturn and then they need
the they were democracies for
democracies existed then that chose not
to be democracies because they became so
disorderly that they wanted some strong
leader to take charge and run the
country and then of course we had a
bunch of straw those types of leaders
and then they had a war that's our world
war two happened so when you look at
that you know that's kind of the
political landscape but back to the
average man in terms of his finances I
would say the important thing is those
three elements to have a plan and maybe
to have a plan with both your family you
know how do you get down when things got
tough and and you know and then you have
to look at you know what happens in
policy well policy is a it depends on
the person some people would understand
more about policy then
other people if if you know so it
depends on what they should do depends
on what they're able to do well as we
sort of step back and start taking a
longer view of this what's the role that
you see education playing in I'm sort of
when I grew up it was just assumed I was
going to go to college I did go to
college and I would have for a very long
time told everybody they should be going
to college now I'm sort of cooled off on
that in terms of the debt that people
are getting into I know you and your
wife are working a lot in the school
system there in Connecticut how do you
how do you think about that what's the
importance of education in you know when
we start thinking about protecting
successive generations how much of that
comes down to education I education is
is the most important thing I I was
raised with the very modest economic
background my dad was a jazz musician my
mom was a stay-at-home mom and but I was
lucky to have parents who cared for me
and I went to a public school and I got
a good education and I came out to a
world of equal opportunity and I believe
that those are fundamental necessities
that that you have to know how to have
an education of you know facts like you
have to know how to read write and
rithmetic but you also have to know how
to behave well with others to be a good
citizen is operate in a civil way to be
able then to go into jobs and that those
took that education can be anything that
works I think the big thing is you know
three big things on what I think work
should be make your work and your
passion the same thing and make it
economic if it works that you love your
work you'll probably be better at your
work
and then you find the so you you want
those things and then the then there's
the economics of it and so it could be
anything from learning trades whatever
it may be education certainly does not
have to be college college is over
emphasized and having a good productive
career when I watch these remarkable
people who are on the front lines of
dealing with this virus situation and I
look at them the grit some of the
greatest people are the people who have
the capabilities of doing certain things
that are not have nothing to do with
going to college and they're on the
front lines and they're contributing a
lot and so we so in education and
civility but that means that there has
to be equal opportunity so yes what my
wife and I have done is we're
particularly heartbroken or disenchanted
with poverty affecting children in and
high school students having the equal
opportunity of education so our
particular focus in Connecticut we made
a donation a large - 100 million dollar
donation to the state of Connecticut for
them to match and are working to get
those students through high school and
but it could be trade school and into
jobs and to be able to be productive so
what you look at all societies and these
are the things that matter most the
society becomes a fairer society when
there's equal opportunity for education
and also it becomes a more productive
Society because the opportunities when
extended throughout the whole population
means that you get more people on the
basis of merit right now that system is
not operating in a good effective way
for example people in the top forty
percent of income will spend about five
times as much money on their children's
education than those in the bottom sixty
percent and that's not that's that's
neither fair nor productive so I think
that these types of questions are going
to have to be examined by policymakers
in a bipartisan way as we go through
this but yes you an answer to your
question you know it really starts with
good total education the good raising of
children in terms of their actual formal
education and their informal education
and then going out and having an
environment of equal opportunity so one
thing that I know you have leveraged to
tremendous effect and this is the very
thing I took from principles that
changed my life is to stress test your
ideas to put him out there to ask how do
I know I'm right so like I said I've
really been losing sleep over how I can
be most helpful in helping people
navigate all of what's happening in and
I have come to a conclusion that could
be pure delusion and I would love to
know what you think it's along the lines
of education which is why I was asking
about that so my obsession is skill
acquisition I think that so the advice
that I've been giving to people if
you've lost your job or not like we have
spent probably the last ten years maybe
more in an employee ease market they've
really had this election they've been
able to put a lot of pressure on
employers and now you're seeing a flip
and you're seeing this is gonna be an
employer's market there's gonna be a lot
of people obviously there's north of 30
million now it's gonna be a lot of
people looking for work and my thing is
if you want to get your ideal job you
want to make your passion something that
you're able to pursue you've got to be
able to outperform other people and I
would say the same thing to a kid that's
coming up somebody that's about to
graduate whatever like you've got to be
better than the next person
you've got to build a skill set that
allows you to excel and my thing is like
you you are living proof of one simple
thing if you can outperform
people there really is no cap to how far
you can go you put your money where your
mouth is when it comes to an investment
strategy obviously with Bridgewater you
guys have just outperformed people it's
really been quite extraordinary and yes
people need to save yes they need to
focus on where you know they're getting
their income from they need to practice
austerity measures all of that but
ultimately people can propel themselves
forward if they're out there learning
growing getting better pushing I would
go so far as to say even being
aggressive to try to continue to move up
but it comes down to recognizing that
skills have utility they actually let
you do something but let you out invest
somebody they let you build a better
house or a better bridge and so what I
want to see people do through this time
I just think most people will be
obliterated mentally they're going to
get scared they're gonna panic they are
not going to be able to think clearly
and they won't put themselves on a path
to excel so wonder what what am I
missing it because I know that people
don't that is not a popular thing to say
right now not something that I get a lot
of negative feedback from people it's
like basically pull yourself up by your
bootstraps so I'd love to understand
like where are the flaws and not
thinking where when you talk about there
not being equal opportunity one what can
people do to write that ship at a
personal level I get I get at the higher
up systemic the way that we address it
your policy and things like that but at
a personal level is there is there
something people can do well I think
you're exactly right I think that that
though is short of specifics and you
know that particular action and the
question is who can help them so yes if
they're wily and hardworking and clever
enough they still need triangulation and
help to find out where is the training
program
what is that skill they they can't do it
alone they have to do with the help I
and I would
recommend you know I did two 30 minute
videos one is principles for success at
30 minute YouTube video and it's about
an approach to life that a lot of people
something like 14 I don't know a lot of
people have seen this and I would say
it's worth your 30 minutes I think in
terms of approach to life and then
there's also if you're interested in the
economy I did a 30 minute video how the
economic machine works in 30 minutes and
that had a lot of use more 14 million I
think
and it was liked so um I can't tell them
in this very brief interview how we're
going to exactly who will get them that
training and that capability but I think
you're right skill that you love self
that sells is what you need now you go
to each person has their own particular
way of possibly getting that to some
case it might be a start low in an
organization and work your way up to
some of the cases it may be a government
training program to some care in some
cases it may be a relative or a friend
who can get you going and so on as I
said one of my main principles is there
is always a path out there you just
don't happen to see the path now so you
have to find the path if you find that
path and you can't find it alone the way
you find that path is to speak to other
people get many ideas by other people
and then you know you have to keep
yourself trial and error you've got to
keep at it like when you're getting a
job or getting the skill it's a lot of
trying and so that requires certain
amount of discipline and if you have a
discipline problem get help with the
discipline problem have somebody kick
you out of bed or whatever it is that um
you can get there there is a path you
just don't see the right path at the
moment
and you can because there are many many
paths the most important thing I think
is to know your nature
what is your nature what is what what
are your strengths and weaknesses and
your likes and your dislikes and once
you know that then you also think what
are the fits oh I would like that job
and the job could pay me well and then
you figure out ok how do you do it how
do I get to it but there are different
people in different circumstances so I
can't answer them all now yeah I agree
with you so I want to go back 1 thank
you for the feedback that I'm I was
being super vague I think that's really
helpful so let's start getting really
specific as much as we can knowing that
people are going to be sort of at very
different places as they're hearing this
but I think this will be helpful so one
the video that you're talking about and
I'll speak for you and correct me where
I go astray but I watch the video
multiple times think it's really
extraordinary and basically to put it in
a really small nutshell it's basically
go out try things fail a lot learn and
keep progressing and that that's
basically if I remember right you have
like this sort of circular ascent and
it's from the failing and the learning
that you ultimately make the progress
but if you put your head down you don't
want to see your mistakes you don't want
to see the flaws in your thinking you're
gonna trap yourself at a plateau and
you're never gonna be able to push
beyond that so you've got to seek out
disconfirming evidence you have to seek
out where you're weak and in fact one
thing I will I sort of disagree
I get what people mean so when you say
know your nature I will say by nature
but before you get to that second part
let me just on the thing yes it's the
looping and learning from mistakes but
it another part of it is the realization
that you don't have to make your
decisions in your own head okay that
when you start to realize that you know
what you're good at and what you're bad
at that a power comes to you when you
start to know okay who's the best person
to
give me the advice or who's the best
person to lead me through this or when
you start to know that you can go beyond
what you think and you're opinionated
miss so that you can triangulate I call
it triangulate with others so that you
find three people who are really capable
of giving you good advice who will argue
with each other and argue with you so
you can see all sides of it and you work
yourself through so it's not just your
eyes looking for the path but it's other
people's eyes looking with the path with
you knowing that you're going to have
successes and failures but that power of
that collective learning and triangulate
well with humbleness is a great power as
you go through that cycle I love that so
I'll push that a step further and I will
say this so I'm gonna be super blunt to
anybody watching right now and Rea if
you think that I'm wrong I trust that
you will jump in no one is coming to
save anybody and that's the hard truth
and if I look at history and even if I
listen which I've listened to literally
every word that you've said on this
subject publicly anyway that this is
just gonna suck like there is going to
be a level of brutality that most of us
have not experienced in our lives
companies are gonna go under people are
gonna lose their jobs they're gonna be
people that are going to struggle to
find their next meal and what what I
want people to understand is just like
you just said you can triangulate you
can get people to help you think through
but I want them to understand that they
can do that in a book at a library they
can do that online if they still have
access to the Internet which as of right
now even just going to the library you
can get access to being online you
changed my life before you and I ever
met I read your book I had never I
didn't even know who you were at that
point and somebody just said hey you've
got to read this books got really
powerful ideas on trust and creating
these hard principles out of all your
mistakes I read it immediately
recognized that this aligned is what I
call the physics of being human it was
so in line with removing my blind spots
getting people acknowledging that other
people are better than me at certain
things and so while I take a little bit
of an exception because I I think
you can't say what your good and bad
until you've been at this for a long
time you've been trying you've been
pushing you learning you're failing
because by nature I'm lazy I I am NOT
very bright I think there are people
that can process raw data far faster
than I can but I'm willing to admit when
I'm wrong I'm willing to admit that I
don't know I'm willing to admit when I
make a mistake and because of that
because I go in that cycle that you talk
about making a mistake
looking naked Liat it not pretending I
didn't screw up asking people to point
out my flaws and then going and now I'm
gonna have to do what is called
deliberate practice to get better at
that thing and I don't just ask and I
don't think people can afford right now
to just say oh what do I want to do
we're for a lot of people this is gonna
be Maslow's hierarchy of needs
you need safety you need security you
need food shelter and I think it's gonna
come to that and so recognizing there
are people out there right now that know
more than you you are going to make a
mistake but those mistakes are huge
learning opportunities you have to admit
that you made one you have to seek
people that can help you remove those
blind spots and then you have to put in
the work to get better does any of that
sound crazy oh that's totally totally
right and then it comes from once you
have a fear that you might be wrong but
you have still the audaciousness and
courage to go forward you're a lot
smarter than the person who thinks they
know there's a there's a quote that's
Jefferson said he who knows he knows not
is closer to the truth then he whose
mind is filled with falsehoods and and
so when you know that and with and then
with your character and your
determination you go forward the
smartest people I know are the most
humble it what the more you learn the
more you realize Oh on eager to take in
so that's right um but back on your
audience I think your audience ranges
from you know there's a wide range that
you have in your own
and I would say that there are many
people in your audience who can plan for
a simple lifestyle that can be wonderful
sometimes we acquire these needs that
aren't at anywhere near as big as as we
make them out to be and you know do you
have a bed to sleep in
do you have food to eat do you have
basic health care okay if you start to
think okay what are my needs that I
really need and on okay and how can I
make provisions for those needs then
once you've got that in your mind you're
you're free okay you can go beyond that
you know that you may say listen oh I
can do that for a year or two years or a
month or whatever but you I think we
visualize too much the things that we're
used to one of the good things about
this exercise is that you can bring it
brings you back to basics you can be
brought to basics and like I'm saying if
you have a bed to sleep it and you've
got food and so on and you have those
basics and good relationships with
people who care about you and basic
health care so if you budget for that
and you figure how do you have it maybe
it isn't in the luxurious place you're
in maybe it's in the country and so on
once you visualize that and you get that
down in your head and you say oh I can
get that then your stress will disappear
because you as you visualize that in
many ways that's a happy life it doesn't
take a lot to there's stimulation
there's nature there's relationships
these fundamental wonderful things the
most important things can be obtained
and so for many of you I think if you
look at that and you budget for that I'm
seeing a number of people who are going
broke
and and I've watched this over many
years and really it's just the
adjustment process one that once they
get to that point where ah you know they
have they get settled they're fine
it's the ambiguity it's the worry it's
the stress so if you do that from the
beginning and you have that that played
out in your head then you know
everything from there you can play with
and it's your it's icing on the cake
you know I want to emphasize you can
budget for that you could look at that
find that scenario find what that looks
like so that you know you got it down
then you know you're safe
once you've got safe everything beyond
that is luxury I forget who the Greek
philosopher was maybe you remember that
used to go and he would sleep on the
street like once a month or something
like that in shabby clothing because he
wanted to remind himself oh this is what
I'm afraid of and this thing isn't that
bad I mean I always found that
interesting I take a slightly different
approach I think that is really powerful
and I think that's an important anchor
for people so my wife and I always say
to each other because look we have been
dirt poor and we have now been very
wealthy and all along the journey we've
always said to each other look man if I
have you like everything else I'm good
so literally there are only two things
I'm legitimately afraid of there are
things I don't want but there are two
things I am legitimately afraid of brain
damage because then I cannot build my
way back I can't have the level of
fulfillment and joy that I want and
losing my wife because a life shared to
me is like the the highest importance
now having said that I'm gonna set all
that aside night I hope people heard you
and I hope that they take it to heart to
paint a lifestyle that they can love and
it's beautiful but it's simple and you
know they don't have all this overhead
hanging over them but I know thyself as
you were saying know what you're good at
what you're not I've always told people
if you want a calm peaceful life I'm not
your guy there there's somebody else for
you to go listen to and follow that
journey if you want to be aggressive and
you want to build something that matters
to you I don't need it to be big I don't
need
to be a business whatever I just people
that want to express themselves want to
get great they want to become
extraordinary at something that's what
I'm far more interested in and so the
way that I look at it is right now it's
a time where economically the chessboard
has has been flipped over but in in that
moment there's going to be opportunity
created and for people that and this my
central thesis is what I said earlier
panic is the problem people cannot allow
themselves to panic which is why I like
what you're saying don't don't worry if
you're if you lose everything right as
long as you have the things that really
matter to you and I think that's
important so people don't panic so they
can be clear-headed so they can figure
out where the opportunities are and then
they get the skillset that they need to
capitalize on that opportunity which for
me is like when I and that's why I keep
saying I'm losing sleep over like how do
we get information out so that I've
worked in the inner cities a lot and to
get the information to somebody out
there that they can triangulate right
that that's not a rich upper class
exercise that's a the information is out
there it's been put in books on a
website in a podcast like the the number
of the world's greatest thinkers right
now that you could be taking this
information from but you have to be
willing to test it you have to be
willing to incorporate it and actually
act on it and do something so I'm not
clear what's your question about that
not so much a question is I'm presenting
what I think are ideas that I want
people to one with partly I'm hoping if
there is a flaw in my thinking I want
you to point it out so going back to the
need for specificity so we're talking
about there is an equal opportunity
because there's not equal access to
education which I will take as the core
of your thesis for generationally moving
forward in a useful way
true it's it's a core piece yeah okay so
what I'm saying is I really hope that
that gets addressed and I will certainly
do whatever I can you're obviously doing
a massive amount there but I also want
people to not wait for someone to make
that change I want them to realize right
now today they can go and learn
something they can educate themselves
you said that it's not about college
it's about getting us
that lets you live a fulfilling filling
meaningful life with a meaningful career
and so I want to see people take action
but if there is a flaw in that thinking
I don't know no I don't of course I
think it's totally right I think then
the issue is going to the next step for
the particulars of actually helping
somebody and and there's a combination
of not only what they can do themselves
but finding others who will help to take
them by the hand and help to provide
that guidance to be able to do that so
500 job let's say you know you think
okay how do you find a job so you have
to be specific so what we could say
great find a skill okay great
but literally how do you go about
finding that skill let's talk so so one
thing you get about from an investing
standpoint is when this begins to happen
in monetary policy begins to break down
won't spend a lot of time describing a
fiat currency but essentially money that
isn't associated to anything like gold
so you've broken that so you said it
gets reassociate it because gold has
intrinsic value or rocks because it's
used to build things so what is looking
at the historical perspective what are
things that are safe that's in terms of
this job is going to be here in five
years that this is a good place to begin
building that skill set you're talking
about the skill set not the investment I
guess yeah skill set I think that that's
maybe more useful for people if they've
just lost their job and you know they're
sort of just trying to make ends meet at
this point well in terms of I think in
terms of any environment the lessons
that we get over and over again is that
you can't be sure what the next
environment and twists and turns are
what you don't know is greater than
anything you do know so if if you were
in the airline business or you were in
the hospitality business
and that was wonderful and you liked it
and everything else all of a sudden that
changed in important ways so the
important thing it more are the more
general abilities in terms of investing
what that means is you need to know how
to diversify well that's the most
important thing in terms of any aspect
in life to know how to deal with what
you don't know is more important than
anything you know because the world is
so much more surprising than you can
really be sure of so in a general same
sense for skills I mean I think and
skills are part of you what are your
environment you know find out those
things that are that are self-sufficient
and maintain flexibility you have to
know how to maintain flexibility and
change well if your career is in one
area you have to know how this you have
to develop the skill for changing a
career and that all comes down to
knowing how to find the path to know how
to triangulate well with others so
you've done such an extraordinary job
ray I truly stand in awe of being able
to go and learn a new area new elements
of the world when you announce that you
were gonna be taking this historical
view and that you were gonna go
backwards I mean something like a
thousand years or however far you went
back how do you begin that research
process so for somebody that's like I
want to invest my time wisely what is
sort of a high-level way that you
approach learning in general well for me
it's a lot the alignment of the three
things that I said before what is my
passion then you know knowing my nature
what is my passion and can I align my
work to my passion and then does it pay
adequately for me to take care of my
needs and for me on I do that because
it's my passion
you know and so when you find your
passion that's aligned with your work if
you can do that but how do you go about
learning something new so when you
started researching the historical
context that what we're going through
now is it picking up books is it you see
I have been my nature is I'm extremely
curious okay and I love my game my game
is to learn about the world interact
with the world and bet on it and I'm
very curious so so it might be whatever
your game is like you've got a game okay
that's why we're you're interviewing me
because that's your passion that's your
game and if you can line those three
things up but and you know your nature
because there if you know your nature
you can find your role you want to find
the right role for you right it's not
just go get a job and you know I might
say I would like to be an architect well
I mean you have to know your nature and
then you can find your role and so on
I'm hesitant to say that what is true
for me is true for somebody else so when
you ask me what you know like okay
those are my big things not meaningful
work and meaningful relationships like
relationships matter a huge amount to me
so if I can have a work that feeds my
curiosity that I'm passionate about and
that pays me adequately and you know and
I do that with great people those are
the things that feed me and so you have
to know those things that feed you like
I like the big picture
somebody might like details you know
that I you know you have to pick those
things that are for your nature and and
align those things I'm talking about
and how did you specifically go about
starting this big research project did
it start with a book did it start with
reaching out to historians
no no it's I mean in a sense the journey
started out when I was 12 years old and
I caddied and I and then I took my
caddying money and had newspaper route
and I did a number of things like that I
took my odds and ends and I put it in
the stock market it you know and and
then I and and I got hooked on the game
do you remember that the nature of
questions in that process like that so I
think it was Tony Robbins that said if
you ask a better question then you're
gonna get a better answer and basically
questions are gonna control the outcome
do you focus on what question you're
asking and trying to answer or is this
something completely different than that
questions questions that's right it's
the hunger to know you'll you'll notice
a difference in people there will be
people who wow you listen good question
good question good question then there
will be people who can't ask questions
that they're just telling you what they
think they almost you think they're
acting smart they think they're acting
smart and they're the stupid ones the
smart ones are old question now how do I
have to find the answer to the question
next question because the questions and
the power and the pull to answer those
questions and so on is the thing that
drags you forward and it's excitement do
you have a pull
okay what's your pull you know so yeah
it's all in questions I think it's all
in a journey life is in a journey an
adventure that's what I'm trying to say
in principles in for success or you can
get by the way but principles if any of
these principles are also principles in
action is an app that's available on the
ice store ice or and it's free and it
has all of these things in it but yeah
so I don't you know because we'll we'll
separate
think people might like that but you
don't have to know your pull and then
along the way you're gonna have your
adventure and you're gonna learn and
then you go through your phases of life
and each phase is different like you
talked about your phase you're in the
middle of your phase in life you talked
about your wife and your relationship
with her okay
that is a phase of life and when you go
and by putting it in perspective it's
helpful in the back of that book
principles for success there's a life
arc chart and if you know where you are
on that life arc and you know what the
next 10 years is typically like and you
know what you're the people you care
about are on their life arcs you can
almost know what's coming at you and
then you could start to think about it
so it's at that level of knowing
yourself and knowing how these things
happen over and over again that you can
achieve your path don't be surprised
most life is this is the same things
that happen over and over again you're
born you probably have parents to take
take care of you maybe you have one
maybe F 2 but somebody does they teach
you you have your first phase of your
life where you're dependent on them and
you're learning then you come out to
your second phase of your life and then
you're working and others are dependent
on you and then you have that so these
things happen over and over again and
and you just have to know that path and
know how to approach it
so really fast before I let you go
you're working on a new book the New
World Order which I find very
fascinating and you've been publishing
some of the chapters on LinkedIn what do
you think the odds are just to really go
back to the finance side of this what do
you think the odds are that America
remains the reserve bank and the reserve
currency and if it's not us who do you
think it will be well all currency is
eventually die and all empires
eventually diminish and their other
empires and the question is essentially
the pace
what how that happens I think that but
for most of your listeners it's most
likely going to happen in a way that's
tolerable if you can manage it we'll
think about the decline of the British
Empire and you see a people or a living
in London and so on it's not that the
world blows up it's that they have to
readapt and they know how to readapt and
so I think that we're going to come
through more difficult times I think the
next three to five years will be
difficult times in ways that haven't
existed in their lifetime but has
existed in other periods of time like
the 1932 45 period so to be able to
adapt well to invent yourself again to
adapt and to navigate that maybe with
the perspective of knowing what those
other times were like is the best thing
to do so the reason I'm doing that
series on LinkedIn is to help people
understand what those times are like and
then help them prepare the reason I
wrote the book principles is so that
it's it's a particular approach because
the same things happen over and over
again
for basically the same reasons and once
you get that and you have the
self-discipline to know how to play the
game well then you'll be fine so one
where can people connect with you right
now then I have one last question that I
want to ask well I'm mom as I say I'm on
social media and we and I'll interact
with people on social media the
standards you know LinkedIn Twitter face
Facebook and Instagram by and large but
the more and the most valuable stuff is
if you go to principals comm you can get
the whole pile or I would say that some
of those places you know so as this next
three to five year part of the cycle
hits us what is one thing that people
can do that you know from the historical
perspective will most insulate them from
the
probably emotional and maybe financial
damage whatever you think is more
important well the the things that I
thought about some of the things I
mentioned earlier the plan for the
worst-case scenario and make it terrific
is one of the things the understanding
how to triangulate well to deal with
whatever problems that you're going to
face and how to work that through to
find the path and find your nature but
also one thing that's helped me a lot is
meditation that if meditation gives you
a calmness an equanimity so that you can
almost look at your circumstances and
you can navigate it with the clarity of
thought without all of that stress it's
healthy because it reduces stress and it
also makes you smarter to make the
decisions well so I would say that that
would also be something that I would
recommend because if if you have the
equanimity that centeredness that calm
centeredness and you have your plan and
you triangulate well with others so that
you can get all the best advice and
don't have to approach it in your own
head you know you're a long way there I
love it right thank you so much for
taking the time to hang out today I
really really appreciate it man and
thank you for everything you're putting
out there you have definitely been one
of the people that I've used to
triangulate my own views and think
through all this stuff so I really
appreciate it
well you're giving a great service to
your listeners and I'm happy to be part
of that thank you for what you're doing
guys if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be a legendary
it's fundamental right when you got this
and you're not going above it and saying
why do you have this or how should this
occur then you've got trouble